# JAVA 
## Features of JAVA
- Java code is complied into Java ***Bytecode***. 
- Bytecode is a highly optimized set of instructions.
- It is executed by ***Java Virtual Machine (JVM)***, which is part of ***Java Runtime Environment (JRE)***.
- Bytecode is *Platform-independent*. It is not specific to any hardware or OS. 
- JVM executes bytecode by interpreting it and converting it to machine code for th specific platform.
- JVM is platform specific, which converts it to machine code of that particular system.
- Thus, Java is `Write once, run anywhere`, i.e. ,same Java progrma can run on any device that has a complatible JVM.
 - **Just-In-Time Compilation** is a runtime optimization, where JVM compiles frequently executed bytecode into native machine code to improve performance.

---
## Object Oriented Programming

| Process Oriented Model | Object Oriented Model |
|:-----------------------| ---------------------:|
|Series of linear steps  | Organizes program around its data(objects) and set of well defines interfaces to that data|
|Code actingon the data  | data controlling access to code|
|eg. C| eg. C++, JAVA|    
|Disadvanatge is that when the program becomes large and complex|Advantage is that it offers several organizational benefits|

### Class & Objects:
 - It defines the structure and behavior (data and code) that will be shared bya set of objects.
 - Each object of a given class contains the structure and behavior defined by that class  
 **Analogy**
 ```
A mold like a cookie cutter = Class
    It defines the structure and shape of the cookies.

The cookies molded from cutter = Object
    Each cookie can have their own unique details while still adheering to the structure of defined by the mold.
 ```
 - Objects = _instances of the class_
 - Members of the class = code and the data that constitutes that class.
 - Data defined by the class = _Member Variables_ or _instance variables_.
 - Code that operates on that data = _member methods_ or _methods_.
 - Methods in JAVA = functionns in C/C++.
 - The behavior and interface of a class are defined by the methods that operate on its instance data.
### Encapsulation :
- It is the mechanism that binds together code and the data it manipulates and keeps both safe from outside access and misuse.
- Purpose of the class is to encapsulate complexity.
- Each method and variable in a class can be marked _public_ or _private_.

> Public  
>Everything that external members of the class may know.

>Private :  
>Methods and data can only be accessed by code that is part of the same

### Inheritance :
- Process by which one object acquires properties of another object.
- Supports the concept of hierarchial classification
- Allows one class(child or subclass) to inherit the methods of another class(parent or superclass).
- It promotes code reusability.

### Polymorphism
- Allows one interface to be used for general class of actions.
- Allows object to be treated as instances of their parent class or interface, allowing a single interface to represent different types.
- **Method Overloading** : 
    - Complie time
    - multiple methods of same name in same class but with different parameters.
    ``` java
        class calculator{
            int add(int a, int b){
                return a+b;
            }

            double add(double a, double b){
                return a+b;
            }
        }
    ```
### Abstraction
- Focuses on hiding implementation details while exposing only functionality to the user.
- Can be achieved using `abstract class`.

### Real World Example to understand OOP :
- All drivers rely on **inheritance** to ddrive different tyes or sublclasses of
vehicles, as they all can find and use the steering wheel, brakes, accelerator,etc.

- Breaks and pedals hide an incredible array of complexity with an interface wich can be controlled using feet, i.e. , they `encapsulate` features of car.

- Car manufacturese to offer a wide array of options (different types of engines, tyres, breaks, etc.) on basically the same vehicle. This is an example of `polymorphism`.
 ---

 - Bytecode can be made by :
 ``` 
    C:\>javac example.java
 ```
 
- Bytecode is executed by :
```
    C:\> java example
```
---
## Example program 1
``` java
class ex1{
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        System.out.println("Example 1");
    }
}
```
